
Moloka'i by Alan Brennert

This is a book a coworker gave to me. It is historical fiction about a
leper colony in Hawaii in the 1900s. Jonathan Strong, author of "A
Circle Around Her", writes: "A generous portrait of a brave, full
life -- Rachel Kalama's disease draws her into healing friendships with
troubled Sister Catherine, with roommate Leilani, who was born in the
wrong body, with her true love Kenji, and more, all in a beautiful land
that's both prison and refuge. Alan Brennert has brought eighty years of
little known history to engrossingly specific life -- as inspiring as it
it heartbreaking."

Rachel Kalama is the main character in the book. Brennert explains in
the Author's Note: "Rachel Kalama is entirely a fictional creation, but
what she experiences as a Hansen's patient is very much based on the
real-world experiences of many such patients. I consulted numerous oral
histories and biographies, distilling them down to their common elements
and from these forging the armature of Rachel's life. ..."

From an Internet search we learn

"Hansen's disease is caused by slow-growing bacteria called
Mycobacterium leprae and Mycobacterium lepromatosis. The disease can
affect the nerves, skin, eyes, and lining of the nose. In some cases,
body parts may lose their sense of touch and pain, increasing the
likelihood of injuries such as cuts and burn.

Despite the disease being hard to catch and completely curable, a lot of
stigma and prejudice remains against those who have Hansen's disease.
Individuals affected by the disease often face social isolation and
discrimination, particularly in regions where the illness is prevalent."

The above has a familiar ring to it. Think HIV/AIDS. Although this
disease and Hansen's disease are very different, the two share a common
stigma. I learned a lot by reading this book.

This story was an emotional roller coaster ride for me, especially at
several key moments.

I usually take notes when I read a book. Turning them into a review,
these highlights emerge.

The book was published in 2003. Chapter 1 is dated 1891. Rachel Kalama,
a 7-year-old Hawaiian girl, is sent to Kalaupapa, a leper settlement on
the island of Moloka'i. Henry Kalama, her father, comes home from one of
his many trips to places all over the globe. His work keeps him away
from his family for long stretches. He usually brings his daughter a
different doll each trip. His love for her is strong and his gifts and
stories give her a sense of wonder about a world she would long to
visit.

We meet Uncle Pono in Chapter 2. Henry's brother has the disease and is
being searched for by authorities. They eventually come and send him to
Moloka'i. Soon, Rachel develops symptoms and they hire someone who gives
her a poultice made from various plants and a young girl's urine (!)
They try other things but the pink sore on her ankle does not go away.
Her mother insists she wear shoes with straps to cover the area. For
this she is bullied and called Miss Shoe by her friends. One day
Rachel's sister calls her a "dirty leper." This is the second time
they've fought. The first time was over Rachel's taking Sarah's hat and
putting it into a make-believe "soup."

The disease is the cause of increasing conflict. A popular belief at the
time is that people get it from their immoral behavior. Uncle Pono and
even Henry are known for their "affairs."

Rachel is sent to live in a convent where she befriends some of the
sisters. Sister Catherine (whose Christian name is Ruth) gets drunk one
night. Lani is a guy but is a woman at heart.

Eventually Rachel runs away and goes to live with and care for her
adoptive aunt. She joins the Federal Leprosy Investigation Station after
two failed boyfriend experiences. She meets Kenji and eventually marries
him. Kenji shames his family (he has the disease). They marry. She
becomes pregnant. Ruth is born. They have to give her up the day the
baby is born. Much, much later in the book the search to find Ruth is
successful.

By Chapter 17 we are told of a guy named Diedrichson who tries to rape
Rachel. During this time Catherine goes to Ithaca, NY to visit her
brother Jack.

The bombing of Pearl Harbor takes place on December 7, 1941. A fellow
named Crossen was there and was drunk most of the time. He beat his
girlfriend Felicia repeatedly. Finally, Kenji and he fight and Rachel
gouges Crossen's eye out. A very violent scene ends with Crossen's
arrest and Kenji's death. This is one of the several moments in the book
where it's hard to get through. Rachel has lost her most loved husband.
Crossen gets 35 years but can live in a nice room. Much later he is
found floating in the water.

We learn what Kenji's parents endured (he is Japanese) when they were
forced from their California homes and jobs and put in camps.

In 1946 a tsunami hits the islands. Rachel's condition worsens. The war
is over. Sulfa drug are developed and begin to help a lot.

After much effort Rachel's adopted daughter Ruth learns where her real
mother is and they visit. The book ends in an incredibly sad but
beautiful way when Ruth comes to attend her mother's funeral.

