
Salt to the Sea
by Ruta Sepetys

Lee Bradley's review

** spoiler alert **

It took me three tries and I finally discovered what a great book this
is. Full review to come. Thanks bookclub members. You remotivated me.
The author's short chapter, four character sequencing was difficult to
get into for me but finally worked beautifully.

Warning. You really should read the book before reading this. It's full
of spoilers.

Also please let me know if anything here is not correct. Especially at
the end of the review. My notes are sketchy.

The story features four main characters: Joana, Florian, Emilia and
Alfred. They are all young, come from different countries, and keep
different secrets. The time is 1945, Germany is on the run (literally)
and the Russians are advancing west.

Ruta Sepetys helps the reader keep track of her characters by giving
them "nicknames" and other attributes; Florian is the "knight", Ingrid
is blind (more later on this), Emilia is a young girl who seems to hide
in a corner a lot and always wears a pink hat, Alfred is always writing
(in his head or on paper) letters to a girlfriend back home, and Joana,
the most recognizable of the four, is a nurse.

There's also a "little wandering boy" who latches on to these people.
His mother is gone, frozen in the snow. His name is Klaus.

They, and thousands of others, are heading toward the Baltic Sea where
several large boats are waiting to take them and transport them to
safety. Language and nationality are important and if you don't have
papers you will not get past various checkpoints.

Florian's secret is that he is working for a guy named Koch, a dealer in
stolen art. Florian is unaware of Koch's real motives. Florian's main
skill is in the restoration of paintings. He is also a skilled forger,
something that comes in handy on several occasions. He carries a key and
a map in his shoe. He hopes to go to the location of a place called the
Amber Room which holds valuable art. He also carries in a backpack a
small amber swan, something Hitler would miss dearly. He has been
wounded and Joana removes shrapnel and sews him up. He is reluctant to
tell her his name.

Emilia's secret is her pregnancy. A horrific story of her parents being
killed and her rape by a Russian is revealed in one of the middle
chapters. She grows to love Florian who is mostly interested in moving
ahead on his own, away from the group. His mission is too important and
secret to be jeopardized by a little pregnant girl. Despite his
misgivings he befriends her. He gives her a gun for protection. There's
a frightening scene in the story when Florian is about to get shot. He
shoots the killer but then realizes Emilia has shot too. It is her
bullet that kills the man.

Alfred Frick, "the sailor", a member of Hitler's Youth, is a selfish,
conceited fellow who considers himself to be the saviour of the
thousands of people who get on the boat called the Wilhelm Gustloff. His
job is to place them and take care of their needs. As the author points
out, her book is historical fiction but the Wilhelm Gustloff, the Amber
Room, and Operation Hannibal (the evacuation) were real. The ship was
built to be a pleasure ship and would carry about two thousand
passengers. Some nine thousand people ended up boarding it. It also
has some twenty-two lifeboats but ten were missing. It's not clear what
happened to them ...

Florian convinces Alfred he will be praised, perhaps by Hitler himself,
and receive a medal if he helps him hide on the ship and thus secure the
safety of his secret mission.

The trip taken by the escapees is terrifying. Russian bombs, terrible
weather, sickness overwhelm them.

Another character in the book I haven't yet mentioned is an old man whose
moniker is the shoe poet. His real name is Heinz. He knows of a large
estate in the area which would serve the group well. It's difficult to
find but they eventually get there. What they find is a place that has
been ransacked. And what they see on the upper floor is a gruesome scene
of murdered owners in bed.

The shoe poet is very wise, very helpful and very observant. He repairs
shoes of people along the way. He is optimistic. He eventually becomes
something of a grandfather to the wandering boy, Klaus, who calls him
Opu.

Joana's secret involves the death of a relative. She feels guilty about
leaving a letter signed by her that ultimately leads the people that
found it to the location where murders took place.

When they all approach the Baltic, it is iced over. It is being bombed
by Russian planes. Ingrid, blind, falls through. We've followed Ingrid
and when we learn this it is heartrending.

A Russian submarine, S-13, launches torpedoes. Three of the four work
and within an hour the boat sinks. There are just over one thousand
survivors. Many thousands die. Opu dies. Emilia and Alfred end up in a
boat together. He ends up toppling off the stern.

I highly recommend this book.

